Newfe


PHS continues its efforts for greater recognition of Black History Month
Katie Qin and Reed Sacks, CONTRIBUTING WRITERS


Every morning, students hear a short announcement of an important person in Black history. These announcements represent a small portion of a larger movement towards greater equity and activism in the PHS community and beyond.                                                                                                                                         
The tradition of honoring African-American history within a specific time period of the calendar year began with Carter G. Woodson when he started the celebration of Negro History Week in February of 1926. Woodson, a noted Black activist and historian, felt that African-American history should be particularly honored given that it was insufficiently prioritized in many American school districts. The week was eventually extended to encompass the entire month.                                                                                                                                          
PHS has been celebrating Black History Month since 2006, and traditions such as making announcements are being kept, while new activities have been formed over the years. Being a thoughtfully planned  and  diverse  celebration  of  history, it is no surprise that the PHS Regional Educational Support Staff Association officer Olive Giles, who helped organize Black History Month, hosted conferences in order to get opinions from the community on how commemorations should manifest themselves.                                                                                                                                     
“It’s like,  how do we tell all these stories…the team put together comprehensive announcements for the entire month that show examples of Black excellence in the sciences, government, politics, military, history, [and] the arts, and it’s laid out [in a way that] makes it easy for me to be able to include that in my announcements in the morning,” said PHS Principal Frank Chmiel.                                                                                                                                         
The Black Student Union (BSU), which had been inactive since 2016, has also recently made a comeback at the February club fair. Many students, not just Black students, are excited to contribute, celebrate, and commemorate Black history every day.                                                                                                                                            
“Something that’s very exciting to me is the revitalization of the Black Student Union… They’ve had 90 students sign up at the club fair, all [with] different cultures and backgrounds, including Black American  students, and so they’re going to be having meetings and getting really active. And to me, as a principal, that’s exciting,” Chmiel said.                                                                                                                                               King-David Ndubisi ’23, who is the president of the Black Student Union, believes that the comeback of the BSU will be an overall benefit to achieving racial equality at PHS.                                                                                                                                               “I believe the purpose is to reform, revive, and expose the hidden Black excellence in our school. By reviving the club, I ‘m giving an opportunity to the upcoming class of Black students,” Ndubisi said.                                                                                                                                               Other new events include Black film screenings that will continue into March, a celebration of activist Paul Robeson, and a Black history program that will run later in the  spring.                                                                                                                                             “We have a series of Black films that we’re going to be showing over the course of the next six to eight weeks, one of which is called ‘1776’… The last big thing we’re doing is celebrating Paul Robeson, who was born in Princeton, and this year is his 125th birthday, making 2023’s Black History Month particularly special and close to home. Then we actually hope to do an actual Black History Month program once the pressure of testing for APs and other graduation requirements are out of the way,” said PHS science supervisor Joy Barnes-Johnson.
“I get to see lots of different things which helped me understand why we still need to have Black history, and it’s kind of just like any other cultural celebration to humanize children; humanize people who identify as Black whether they are African, Caribbean, African-American, or just identify as Black. [We’re] so diverse,” Barnes-Johnson said.
Today, Princeton spearheads N.J.’s efforts toward affordable housing and equity and is home to the Not in Our Town initiative, which offers classes and lesson plans to schools and hosts meetings for people in the community to voice their grievances. The organization has heavily awarded PHS students and staff, notably PHS Racial Literacy supervisor and history teacher Patricia Manhart, and Barnes-Johnson. This push, which was started by a few trailblazing students and teachers, has snowballed into a greater attempt to expand to a wider audience at not only PHS, but also the entirety of Princeton.       
While Princeton currently strives to be a state leader in equity, diversity, and inclusion, its history casts a jarring shadow. Throughout the 19th and the first half of the 20th century, the practice of segregation was exhibited in its schools, institutions such as the YMCA, and businesses along Nassau Street. 
While segregationist outlooks continued to maintain traction in Princeton during the post-Civil War era, integration was finally able to be realized in the 1947 Princeton Plan. This vision aimed to eliminate racial segregation in education through the clearing of biased border lines; for example, it created the first integrated elementary school in Princeton. Although the transition was bumpy, the anti-racist trend continued into the 21st century. 
“The Princeton Plan of 1947 was basically the beginning of school integration here in New Jersey. We realize that here on the East Coast, most people think about Brown v. the Board of Education. But [the Princeton Plan] is a big deal … this is the 75th anniversary of the Princeton Plan here in Princeton … It’s like how do we tell all these stories about who we are; this is what we want to do. And so Black History Month is about telling a bigger story,” Barnes-Johnson said.
In America, Black History Month honors the hardships and successes of African Americans who have contributed to the success of the nation. At PHS, Black History Month also represents a spotlight on cultural diversity and social acceptance. Black History Month may only be during February, but it emphasizes that Black culture and accomplishments should be acknowledged and celebrated all 365 days a year. Everybody has achievements and stories, whether that is expressed through words, art, literature, or ideas; BHM is just one of many ways of passing down Black history. 
“But really, Black history is American history. And that’s a quote from Morgan Freeman, the famous American actor and civil rights activist. [Black history] should permeate all aspects of education,” Chmiel said.


  
PHS begins transition to Scoir, a new college planning software tool
Leila Guitton and Meiya Xiong, CONTRIBUTING WRITERS


By June 30, PHS will have completed its transition between the college and career-planning platforms Naviance and Scoir. After several years of using Naviance to help students plan for post-secondary education endeavors, students and parents received notices in early January that the school would be moving to Scoir, a more interactive platform.                                                                                                                                           Previously, Naviance had been used mainly by students in grades ten and up, allowing them to research colleges and track community service hours. Also, when their college list was finalized, applications, letters of recommendation, and transcripts could all be sent through Naviance. The program could also be used to provide students in lower grades a personalized list of possible careers based on their interests, giving them insight for their future.  Despite these many capabilities, Naviance was not very user-friendly, prompting the change to Scoir.                                                                                                                                              
Although the switch was sudden and unexpected, PHS college counselor  Nipurna Shah reassures that not much will change.                                                                                                                                        
“Scoir does pretty much exactly the same thing [as Naviance…]. Scoir is a little bit more modern, and the user experience is much easier [...] Naviance is a little clunky,” Shah said.                                                                                                                                               Immediately after logging into Scoir, students are greeted by an enthusiastic message: “Welcome to the Scoir fam!” The site’s layout is organized to promote a more interactive user experience. Several helpful tools include a page that  allows side-by-side comparison of universities, a calendar for application deadlines and visits, and even a section that displays registration for office hour appointments with Shah. In addition, there are several elements not available on Naviance, including videos and Scoir’s own podcast “Inside College Admissions,” which gives detailed advice about the application process and features guests such as college admissions counselors.
Many schools in the area have already switched to Scoir, making PHS one of the last to get on the Scoir bandwagon. This program will be more accessible, since it can be downloaded as a mobile application on cell phones, allowing  the information on the platform easier to obtain and use for both parents and students.
“We really want to make sure that … counselors, parents, and students are all on the same page [throughout the application process],” Shah said.
Current juniors are the most likely to engage with Scoir, using it to start researching colleges and eventually organizing their college applications directly on the platform. 
 “I haven’t really had that much experience using [Scoir], but it seems to work. I don’t like Naviance [because] I think it’s really annoying to log into, so I say [the change is] great,” said Kailani Harrison ’24. 
Although this platform is most relevant for current juniors, Shah suggests that current freshmen and sophomores should start to interact with the website, as most underclassmen aren’t able to reap the benefits of the programs  that PHS pays for, due to the simple fact that most students aren’t aware of its existence.
“For ninth and tenth grade students, really just start exploring and playing around with it, [so that by next year], you’ll be really familiar with it. The college journey is really one of self exploration and finding those schools. Scoir makes it really easy [to start this process],” Shah said.
Since this is also the time of year when students have to start thinking about their course selections for the upcoming year, Shah suggests using the specialized career profiles and clusters on the platform to choose courses and participate in clubs that align with careers that interest them. These can be accessed by clicking on one of the many surveys present on the home screen or by clicking on the discovery tab located at the top right of the website. 
Meanwhile, there is good news for students who are concerned about how their hard-earned community service hours will transfer to the new program. Because x2VOL, the current software used, is separate from Naviance, community service hours will continue to be stored there, meaning that students won’t need to learn to navigate a new program. As of now, the administration is still working out the logistics of where the site will be accessed through. Whether the login information will be through Scoir or PPS link, Karas assured that students’ hours will not be lost.
“Don’t be afraid of the transition … just have fun with it,” Karas said.




Love is in the air with Valentine’s Day Soap Sale
William Alena and Zee Arr, CONTRIBUTING WRITERS
 Throughout the month of February, the PHS research program hosted a “Love Bug” Valentine’s Day-themed soap sale, with the proceeds directly funding the research program’s entry into this year’s Samsung “Solve for Tomorrow” competition, which they aim to win for the second year in a row.                                                                                                                                                
The soaps are made by PHS students in the program who developed an innovative soap-making process in preparation for last year’s “Solve for Tomorrow” competition, where they received a $100,000 grand prize. By selling these soaps, Daniela Gonzalez, who is in charge of this year’s Research Program soap sale, hopes to fund the research program’s entry into this year’s Samsung design competition.                                                                                                                                       “It’s a way of supporting the research program … by protecting and preserving the environment. Also, [you are] giving students opportunities to be creative,” said PHS Research Program Teacher Mark Eastburn.                                                                                                                                            The larvae oil extracted from black soldier flies are a sustainable alternative to the environmentally-destructive palm oil that is commonly used in regular soaps. The black soldier flies are fed entirely with food waste from the cafeteria, making the soldier fly soaps more sustainable than many other soaps on the market. Using the oil, lavender, coconut, lemon, and other scented soaps were created and sold. A lot of research went into creating these interesting scents.                                                                                                                                            “I think this is a pretty cool opportunity to learn some chemistry to protect the environment because we’re helping eliminate food waste [when] we use the black soldier flies. We [also] get to our courtyard where we can grow [plants] right here on campus and then extract oils from them,” Eastburn said.                                                                                                                                               However, inventing these new soaps was not an easy feat. Through trial and error, the PHS Research Program has been able to create the best product they possibly can.                                                                                                                                               “These are all fairly new recipes, but we want to make sure that we’re doing it right. We want feedback and we want people to try it and see what they think, because it’s a pretty cool opportunity to learn some chemistry to protect the environment,” Eastburn said. 
Creating the soaps have also been popular among students who are participating in the research program. Luisa Buss ’25, a member of this year’s research team, believes that the research team offers a lot of opportunities for students who want to expand their interests.
“As a student, I am very grateful that the research program can keep going using these funds. Buying these soaps allows students like myself to be flexible in my studies and interests,” Buss said. 
In addition to feeding the soldier flies leftover food, the PHS Research Program has also been able to find other ways to also reduce food waste through their experiments with soaps. Eastburn, who is in charge of the Food Produce Giveaway Program, has found ways to reduce food waste while helping people in need. 
“We send hunger packages and deliver food for students who would need it. If there’s leftovers, I don’t want it to be wasted. So then I ended up giving it to other students and we all got to eat more fresh fruits and vegetables,” Eastburn said.
Although profit may be minimal, every penny that is earned is reinvested right back into the program.
“We’re not making a profit off of it, but we’re at least sustaining, and if we can get enough money, then we’ll get a better setup with the chicken coop now. Sending hunger packages is also helping us buy some more materials to make that chicken coop more secure,” Eastburn said.
As the PHS Research Program gets ready to enter the competition, Gonzalez and Eastburn hope that creating and selling these soaps will also inform students and their families about how to be more sustainable. Since these soaps are made from natural and high-quality ingredients, Gonzalez believes that they are not only good for the environment, but also for the users themselves.
“We can actually make an impact on the environment because we’re using ingredients that are sustainable, not like the palm oil and the other bad ingredients. We can use very good [and] natural ingredients that are [grown] at PHS,” Gonzalez said.




PHS Profile: Gary Harris pushes the importance of recycling
Matias Blix and Matias Da Costa, CONTRIBUTING WRITERS
After a 13-year career, Gary Harris, a janitor at PHS, will retire on June 30. He will leave a lasting impact on the students and teachers at PHS because of his efforts to go the extra mile for students, as well as to ensure that PHS recycles properly.
   Growing up in Newark, Harris began working part-time supervising young kids at a recreation center at the age of 16. As he got older, he took on a number of other jobs, such as working at a luggage company and as a crossing guard. The job which prepared him most for his time at PHS, though, was his job at a paper recycling company, where he learned the intricacies of recycling for over ten years.
   Harris prides himself in his job, beginning his shift at 2:30 p.m., a full hour before it is supposed to start, and ending it after 10:00 p.m., hours after his colleagues have finished. Part of the reason why he stays so long is that he meticulously sorts through the trash bags of other janitors to take out the recycling, a process that other janitors are unwilling to do. In fact, his boss sometimes has to make him leave the school so that he can go home. However, with his past work experience, he feels obligated to do this, despite the amount of time investment required.
   “I do the little things that other people won’t take the time to do… I take time out to do stuff like that. To me, it’s not a big deal. My boss will get mad because I stand there when it’s ten o’clock at night, and I’ll be in the main office or the library with a stack of about 1000 books. I stood in till the a.m. last year when [students] had to take the PSAT… I was tearing them out, pulling staples out, and separating the paper,” Harris said. 
   Throughout Harris’s time at PHS, one major problem he’s noticed is that the students and faculty are not recycling. To resolve this issue, he proposes a simple, yet clever solution to encourage recycling. 
   “We should really force people to recycle,” said Harris. “I can’t make everyone do this… but it would help. It would make it much easier for [the janitors] to recycle [properly]. But I can understand the simple fact that if you had a big garbage [bin] or a small blue one with a little hole, you’d naturally throw your garbage away in the big one. The main aim is [to have] the ones where you push the thing [that] swings back. Those would be perfect.”
   Leaving behind a legacy of love and kindness, Harris will miss the close relationships he has made during his rounds each night. Following his retirement, he hopes to be able to spend much more quality time with his grandkids and close family. He also wants to watch more sports, and a variety of movies including dramas, mysteries, and sci-fi. 
   “I’m not going to miss the job so much, but I am going to miss the people that I met here. I know almost every principal and every custodian here. I’m going to miss a lot of students because I remember when I first met them, and it makes me feel good to see [them]... going to high school… then college,” Harris said.
   Harris’s dedication and motivation to help others has left an impact on the PHS community and how it deals with different types of waste. Although many students may not know about Harris, his efforts to promote recycling have caused an increase in awareness throughout the school. 
   “PHS is relatively cleaner than most other schools,” said Sawyer Quallen ’24. “[There] is an abundance of recycling bins throughout the school and inside classrooms, making it more convenient to recycle. With limited resources on our planet and community, we should make a stronger effort to reuse and recycle. Our actions dictate our future, and how we choose to use our resources greatly affects it,” Quallen said.
   For the past 13 years, Harris has made close friends in the Princeton High School community, not only with staff, but also with students who he has met over the years. He also shows that it is the little things in life that make a difference in the world, such as recycling properly. Harris’s time working at PHS sets an example for hard work and being kind to others, even when it may require more time and effort.
   “I’m just one of the many custodians that work [at PHS],” said Harris. “[But] I try to do it the best I can.”


Princeton Public Library offers “Chill Out Nights” for students
Elsa Barzilai and Anatasia Morozov, CONTRIBUTING WRITERS


On February 3, the Princeton Public Library Teen Advisory Board (TAB) hosted a “Chill Out Night” for high school students, hoping to relieve some of the stress surrounding midterms. Studying and homework can easily occupy many students’ free time, but it is also important to find time to unwind and decompress. The library’s “Chill Out Night” was created with the hope of doing just that, providing a space for them to unwind and interact with their community. 
   During the event, the Teen Advisory Board played the iconic 1995 movie “Clueless” and provided snacks. With  about ten to fifteen attendees at the event, these students were able to gather and relieve their stress from strenuous and nerve-wracking testing.
After the event was over, it seemed as though the attendees were generally satisfied with the experience and appreciative of the movie selection. “Clueless,” a lighthearted movie about a teenage girl whose lifestyle is presented in an exaggerated and comedic way, was popular among the group.
Shira Kremer-Godelmik ’26, one of the event’s attendees, believed that the movie was very relatable amongst her peers, making it an excellent choice for the night.
“I feel like it’s pretty fun to get together with a bunch of people and do stuff like watch a movie... There’s a part of it for everyone,” Kremer-Godelmik said.
Along with the students who attended, the librarians involved also believed that this was a beneficial experience for everyone. They enjoyed seeing students come to the library to do activities besides studying.
 “I think it’s a great way to decompress after a very stressful time. It’s also nice to come to the library and see [that] there are other things for you guys to do,” said Marissa Warren, a Teen Service Librarian at the PPL.
For students who missed out on this event, the library has many more similar events planned later in the school year. When asked about the future of TAB events, Warren said that there will be more events for students to get their mind off schoolwork.
“We’ll always be doing movies! We might be doing a Marvel movie marathon. It could maybe be horror, depending on how TAB is feeling,” said Warren. “We’ll definitely be doing more chillouts!”
Overall, the library provides many opportunities for teens to interact with their community, be it through Chill Out Nights that help teens decompress, arts and crafts sessions, or by becoming a TAB member.
“It was pretty fun. I kind of forgot everything for a while and just watched the movie,” said Kremer-Godelmik.


Ops


Battling Toxic Norms on Valentine’s Day
Katie Qin, CONTRIBUTING WRITER


  What’s more classic than red hearts, chocolates, and big teddy bears on Valentine’s Day? The answer is the traditional norms that people often feel the need to conform to during this holiday. As Valentine’s Day just passed, it’s a good time to discuss how these norms can be harmful to many people who want to celebrate the holiday, but may not fit into the mold of the traditions held by society. Additionally, the desire to be in a romantic relationship often seems to overshadow the appreciation people have for themselves and their friends. Our community at PHS is very diverse, and we should find ways to create inclusivity in the way we celebrate and discuss Valentine’s Day. It is imperative that we start prioritizing creating new holiday traditions over the old-fashioned norms that are often more harmful than helpful.
  The traditional themes of Valentine’s Day do not apply to the diverse spectrum of relationships that exist in contemporary America, and the outdated traditions of Valentine’s Day should be replaced with more inclusive ones to celebrate our love for each other. LGBTQ+ people are often underrepresented during this holiday, and it’s important that companies keep these types of relationships in mind when creating Valentine’s Day products. Instead of exclusively “His” and “Hers” themed products, there should be gender-neutral pronouns available as an option. Although several companies are already starting to do this, if the production of LGBTQ-oriented holiday items was more widespread, more couples and gender-nonconforming individuals would feel much more included in the holiday celebrations. Not only do the traditional norms of Valentine’s Day exclude people who may not fit the stereotypical image of a Valentine’s Day couple, but they make many people feel the need to have a partner, even if they may not actually want to. “Cuffing season” can pressure people to be in public relationships because they think that it can get them more attention on social media. However, those quickly planned Valentine’s relationships are not what the holiday is about. Valentine’s Day is intended to be a way to celebrate all love, including those who don’t have a romantic partner in their lives. Small gestures like sending notes to your friends on Valentine’s Day can reaffirm the already strong relationships that you have in your life, without adding the pressure to conform to the relationship standard surrounding Valentine’s Day. Society has told us that Valentine’s Day is all about these types of relationships, but if we start to break those traditions and celebrate the holiday of love in whatever way fits us, we can prevent the uncomfortable feelings that people may have around this time of year.
  The love we have towards other people is very important, but it can also be beneficial to look within and understand the importance of self-love on a day that celebrates relationships. Your relationship with yourself is so important, and Valentine’s Day is an opportunity to cultivate it. This can be through treating yourself to your favorite meal, buying something that you’ve been eyeing for a long time, or even simply setting time aside to relax and let your mind be at ease. Prioritizing self-love can be a 




















































a great way for people to appreciate Valentine’s Day, and it should be normalized by society.
   The day of love recently concluded, and we should take the opportunity to reevaluate the way we discuss love and relationships at PHS. Even if we can’t convince major companies to change their gendered products that are clearly marketed towards straight, cisgender people, we can change the way we speak about Valentine’s Day and the types of relationships that exist in and out of our school. We should work to eliminate the pressure to conform to the standard Valentine’s Day traditions, and should instead use Valentine’s Day as a time to express love to our friends, family, and ourselves. At the end of the day, Valentine’s Day is supposed to celebrate love, but that can’t be fully realized until we reinvent the holiday to celebrate all of its expressions. 


What are we wearing: An outlook into the world of PHS fashion
Tamar Assayag and Jane Bennett, CONTRIBUTING WRITERS


   With the conclusion of New York Fashion Week for the spring season, it is time to do a full Anna Wintour-style review of PHS. As teenagers who are constantly consuming media, we are impacted by the trends and styles that we see in high-end fashion brands, whose products are considered to be the finest, most exemplary creations in the fashion world. However, the attire that most students at PHS come to school in seems to take no influence from the people that consume so much of our time on social media. 
   Since the beginning of American history, style standards have become more and more relaxed, much to the benefit of those who no longer need to wear corsets or cumberbunds. From the 1970s to 2000s, school style stayed relatively consistent, with students wearing jeans, T-shirts, and casual street wear. Although some students occasionally break out of the style, for the most part, school style has stayed very consistent for the last 40 years. 
   However, in the past ten years, that standard has almost disappeared. Although many of us are happy to have the flexibility to wear sweatpants to school, should pajamas and loungewear really be the standard of what we wear to school? If clothes are a way to express ourselves, then we should be trying to wear outfits in school that break from the norm and express how we want to look.
   Since we came back to school following the pandemic, it seems as though there’s been an upward trend in the loungewear that we see worn at PHS. For over a year, it was perfectly normal to wear pajamas to Zoom class. In fact,  not having to worry about how our clothes were perceived 
by others was a major relief. When we returned to school, we tried to wear clothes that represented the way that we wanted to appear to the world or stayed in the clothes that we wore all throughout the pandemic. The majority of students maintained the norm that was established during the lockdown, wearing sweats to school. But as this routine continued, it became even more difficult to break out of it. When we see others wearing pajamas to school, we are more likely to do the same, wanting to blend in. But if that does not match your personal style, you shouldn’t be so influenced by other people to copy that look. Individuality and self-identity are significantly more important than the desire to dress identically to the people you surround yourself with. Only a temporary feeling of “fitting in” is gained from doing so, and eventually, discomfort, knowing that you don’t actually fit into the boxes you’ve forced yourself into.
   Not only does keeping up with the latest fashion trend eliminate personal style, but it’s also exhausting. Fashion trends change so often, meaning that they’re almost impossible to keep up with. When you do so, it ends up being tremendously expensive. If we rushed to the shopping cart every time we saw a pop-up ad for the most-bought item at SHEIN, our hauls would overload our wardrobes, and our financial struggles would only be amplified. It’s easy to get sucked into a frenzy over fast fashion, because at first glance, it might seem affordable, but like anything else, the price tags add up. Oftentimes, these clothes end up in the trash due to the ever-changing trends. Alternatively, people might throw these clothes away due to the poor-quality materials used in these “cheap” products, just to follow their actions up with another clothing haul, continuing the cycle. This amounts to a large amount of wasted products that are costly not only to our wallets but to the environment. The non-profit organization Rest of World conducted an investigation that discovered that between July and December of 2021, SHEIN added between 2,000 to 10,000 new styles to their app daily. With such insane numbers, it comes at no surprise that the company’s carbon footprint is worse than very poor, producing 6.3 million tons of carbon dioxide yearly, according to a 2023 study by Time. The environmental damage caused by SHEIN and other such fast fashion brands simply cannot be ignored, and it is a major reason to completely ditch fashion trends which encourage consumers to keep buying more and more products. SHEIN also does not produce the types of clothes that are particularly representative of personal style because they sell clothing that is simply meant to check a box for what’s trending at the moment. When so many consumers shop from the same brand, the clothes they wear look the same as the ones worn by everyone else, which makes fast fashion not only environmentally unfriendly, but also lacking in individuality. A more sustainable way of cultivating personal style is thrifting. Not only is thrifting inexpensive, but it allows you to repurpose already created clothes, and the items that you find are almost always unique and for a good price. 
  It should become more normalized for students to actually represent themselves through their appearance when they want to. What we really want is for PHS to be an environment in which people feel comfortable wearing clothes that they think represent their interests, personal identity, and the way that they truly want to be seen by others. What we truly want to see is students abandoning their pandemic habits of comfort over self-expression. Fashion trends are harmful to our ability to self-express while simultaneously hurting the environment around us. There’s no reason to prioritize trends over using clothes as a method of showing the world who we are. It seems that the true line between loungewear and Dior is simply what you feel comfortable in. Truly wearing what you want to convey about yourself should come first, not the influence of other people and the media. If that happens to be sweatpants, then that’s absolutely wonderful, and if it is a full petticoat and stays, that is wonderful as well.


Florida’s education problem: Are we teetering on the edge of censorship?
Kai Wilhelm, CONTRIBUTING WRITER


   Living in a relatively progressive area with access to great education, we don’t often think about how censorship could be a part of how we learn in schools. However, academic censorship has the potential to become a major issue with the passing of the Stop Wrong to Our Kids and Employees, or Stop W.O.K.E Act, in Florida by Governor Ron DeSantis. The Stop W.O.K.E Act prohibits the teaching of critical race theory in K-12 curriculums and workplaces. Critical race theory is a framework that argues that racism is not a result of individual biases, but rather systemically embedded in U.S. legal systems and policies that are the root of all problems plaguing African Americans. Although not everyone needs to believe that critical race theory is true, it is imperative that all Americans are educated about this eye-opening approach to how the history of racism in America still affects us today. As such, censoring this theory is a violation of the integrity of our education, which should never be the norm in an educational or work environment.
     One curriculum that has been recently entangled with the Stop W.O.K.E. Act is the AP African American Studies course. This course has been presented as an option in several high schools this school year, and is set to be offered all around the country in the 2024-25 school year. The class delves into the important contributions of African Americans, as well as more modern race-related movements. However, the banning of this class would potentially go against another Florida law from 1994, which mandates the teaching of general African- American history in schools. In the end, the act was not a major catalyst in the changes made to the AP African- American Studies course, but it has raised awareness of the possibility of censorship in our education. The College Board released an updated version of the AP African American Studies course curriculum on February 1, 2023. The new version excluded several of the initial topics such as critical race theory, the Black Lives Matter movement, and other contemporary racial issues. It seems rather intentional that the changes to the AP course coincided with the passing of the Stop W.O.K.E. Act. DeSantis believed that the course was a form of indoctrination for students, and would make white students feel shame for their racial privilege; however, by limiting the education of students on race, DeSantis in turn perpetuates indoctrination because he is enforcing a system that silences the voices of Black individuals. Therefore, College Board should not continue to be making changes to this course, especially in places like Florida, where education about race is already unsubstantial. After all, limiting the education in public schools is censorship because it excludes part of what students should be taught. If we start increasing the amount of censorship in our education system, we will never grasp the full, complete history of our nation; we will only learn a history that has been modified so much that it is an unrecognizable version of the truth and leaves out crucially important and impactful events from the past
   Many important figures have opposed the Stop W.O.K.E. Act, such as Judge Mark E. Walker, the chief U.S. district judge of Tallahassee, who worked towards blocking the law. During the preliminary ruling on a recent case, Judge Walker prevented the Stop W.O.K.E. Act from being upheld in higher education, saying that using the power of the government to restrict the language used by professors and educators in the classroom is “positively dystopian.” Walker blocked the law when it was targeting workplace diversity practices, including recognizing unconscious bias. Without this training, workplaces become less inclusive, because people are not as aware of the potential impact of their actions. As a result of DeSantis’ censorship campaign and others spreading around the U.S., it seems evident that educational censorship may as well be a nationwide crisis. 
   When the “Parental Rights in Education” bill (nicknamed the “Don’t Say Gay” bill) was introduced in Florida in 2022, many students protested against the censorship of sexuality and gender discussions in schools. The same can be done for the Stop W.O.K.E Act. We should continue to study critical race theory, as well as encourage our friends in other areas around the country to do so as well. This way we can continue to learn about this important topic on our own, even if it is not a part of what we are taught in schools. This will not only ensure that we continue to educate ourselves about race (although not in schools), but it will also help to harbor a more inclusive generation of young people in the United States.   
   Although self-studying can help us gain a baseline understanding of critical race theory and other race-related subjects, it will not permanently put an end to the rampant censorship in the classroom. Even though PHS has not been affected by the Stop W.O.K.E Act yet, it is evident that censorship could become a serious national issue and eventually impact how we are taught about race. In order to prevent serious censorship in education, a federal law is needed to prevent laws similar to the Stop W.O.K.E. Act. Considering that the ideas held in Florida about racial education are spreading to other areas around the country, it is possible that other laws like this act could become normalized in our society. With a law to prevent it, we would be in less danger of those ideas being spread to our school, and the law could allow others to see a true portrayal of race in America. 
    Censorship fails to teach students the full story of what the world is like or how it had become that way. It also continues to shield students from the truths of society and the diverse perspectives on our history, which is ultimately what education should be about. This dystopian future that we’re descending into is extremely alarming, and as high school students, we should fight against the censorship that is slowly encroaching on the integrity and quality of our education.
   
  



(Group Editorial) The importance of educating students on disabilities


“Live to learn, learn to live” is the motto that Princeton Public Schools strives to achieve  every day, and being ranked within the top four percent of school systems in the country, PPS has had undeniable success in doing so. In recent years, there’s been an increase in awareness and education on Black History, LGBTQ+ rights, and Latinx heritage, all of which are steps in the right direction to produce a more informed and understanding student body. However, with around 17 percent of the PPS student body needing an individualized education plan (IEP) or learning accommodations, according to the PPS Comprehensive Special Education Review in 2021, awareness and education about disabilities rarely seem to be a topic of discussion within PPS. 
According to the CDC, 26 percent of the total U.S. population currently lives with at least one disability — a physical or mental condition that limits a person’s movements, senses, or actions. Disability awareness is important for understanding the inequities that these individuals face in all facets of society and how to break down the barriers that are caused by an inherently ableist society. 
In the PPS elementary schools, students, for the most part, learn side by side with their peers who have disabilities. While learning with peers with disabilities can help young students recognize what disabilities look like, students should be explicitly taught about what disabilities are and why people with disabilities should be treated with respect. This education can come in the form of assemblies or a “Disabilities Awareness Week” dedicated to disability awareness. Other districts around Princeton have already implemented these types of activities successfully. For example, at Brunswick Acres Elementary School in South Brunswick, there is an annual “Autism Awareness Month,” where the students learn about what it means to have autism, as well as the importance of treating students with disabilities the same as they would with other students despite the treatment that those students receive from the administration. Furthermore, there is an annual “Disabilities Awareness Week” where students can learn about the struggles of having a disability from special education educators as well as how to respectfully speak about the disabilities of others. This education helps students to not only be respectful peers, but also informed and understanding citizens of the world.
Teaching inclusion in elementary schools is only the first step in raising awareness about disabilities, though. When students advance through the grades, the focus on advanced classes and intense extracurriculars increasingly isolates students with disabilities who might not be able to thrive in those environments. As a result of this, students with disabilities may find their class options to be limited and struggle to fit in with others. However, this doesn’t have to be the case. For example, students could be provided with the option to take a musical appreciation course. Instead of focusing solely on perfection and excellence in music, the subject would be taught in a more inclusive and less competitive way. Not only would this allow students with disabilities to have a similar educational experience to students without disabilities, but it would also help students with disabilities to combat the isolation that can come with age.
Moreover, at PHS, ableist slurs such as the R-slur are so integrated into everyday speech that students don’t even seem to understand the implicated ableist undertones. If there is increased education and emphasis on the harmful effects of using such language, our school will be a much more inclusive environment for students with disabilities. 
By initiating programs and activities to promote disability awareness, PPS can create a student body that respects students with disabilities and understands the harmful implications of ableist language. It’s clear that our academic achievements at PHS show that we “live to learn” every day, but by educating students about disabilities, we can be one step closer to “learning to live” in a more equitable world. 


Breaking the winter blues: how PHS can help students tackle seasonal depression
Aishwarya Vedula, CONTRIBUTING WRITER


Let’s start with a quick question — what even is seasonal depression? Seasonal depression, also known as seasonal affective disorder (SAD), is a type of depression associated with the changing of seasons. It usually manifests during the winter months but can also occur during other times of the year. 
The reduced level of sunlight in fall and winter may cause winter-onset seasonal depression. This decreased level of sunlight can disrupt your body’s internal clock and lead to feelings of melancholy. Because of the shorter days and longer hours of darkness in fall and winter, higher levels of melatonin and lower levels of serotonin are produced. Higher melatonin levels cause a person to feel sleepy and less energetic, while lower serotonin levels limit feelings of happiness. Some symptoms that commonly manifest in students include feelings of hopelessness, irregular eating and sleeping patterns, difficulties with concentration and memory, fatigue, and social withdrawal.
Since seasonal depression especially affects teenagers, PHS needs to be especially attentive to its effects. Schools play a crucial role in supporting students during this time, as we spend the majority of the day in a school environment. When students are already dealing with cold and dark weather as well as decreased daylight hours, what can our school do to better support students with seasonal depression?
First off, PHS should start encouraging more students to take advantage of the mental health support services available at PHS, such as speaking to the school counselors, visiting the school psychologist, or going to the Wellness Center by the guidance office to get snacks and relax. These services can be really helpful for students who need time to talk about feeling overwhelmed, or stressed about school or life in general. 
These solutions are not perfect, though, as students have to go through a procedure of scheduling time slots and missing class in order to meet with counselors or visit the school psychologist. Missing class can cause students to fall behind on classwork, making it even harder for them to cope with the growing workload they receive from school everyday. 
To make mental health services more accessible to students, PHS should also offer other activities to help students cope with mental health issues. For example, PHS could plan outdoor activities for students to participate in and extend breaks to let students spend more time outside. If the weather is particularly good, PHS should encourage teachers to teach their classes outside, if possible. Exposure to sunlight has been shown to have a positive impact on seasonal depression.   
The National Library of Medicine found that diets can also provide benefits for people coping with seasonal depression. With this knowledge, PHS could alter cafeteria menus to have more foods higher in B12 and omega-3 fatty acids, such as spinach, dairy, and fish. These chemicals play vital roles in synthesizing serotonin, boosting energy as a result.
Furthermore, teachers should be trained to recognize the signs of seasonal depression and offer appropriate support to students who may be struggling. This would allow teachers to understand the student’s point of view and help them accordingly, or recommend activities and support services that the student could use to their benefit.
Seasonal depression is not just an issue in the winter, as it is also present at a smaller scale during the summer. Going forward, PHS can help students prepare for the summer months by providing resources such as summer programs or activities that promote socialization, as well as by providing mental health support services throughout the summer months.
By raising awareness and teaching students about seasonal depression, PHS can work harder to break down the stigma surrounding mental health issues. PHS should be a space where seasonal depression  can be talked about in a way that helps students find solutions to this issue, and promotes taking a step towards improving their own mental health during these harsh months. 


VANG
: PDF DOWNLOAD

A&E


First international PHS Choir performance since the pandemic
Todor Pophristic and Luca Balescu, STAFF WRITERS


From February 10 to the 18, PHS Choir traveled throughout Portugal, showcasing their vocal talent in a series of concerts in Coimbra, Porto, and Lisbon. The tour was full of opportunities to explore Portuguese culture, from the unique musical traditions of the country to its art museum in Porto and the historic sites of Lisbon.
PHS Choir students were thrilled about the opportunities they had in Portugal. Many were excited for the chance to participate in Portugal’s food festivals, try the famous Portuguese pastéis de nata, and visit different restaurants and Portuguese monuments. 
“I am hoping to learn about the country and its people as well as the culture and significance. It’s definitely a once in a lifetime experience, and I know I will enjoy it,” said Emil Hansen ’23 prior to the trip. 
Members of the choir have built strong bonds and lasting friendships through their years of performing together, which makes the trip that much more special. It’s not just a group of high schoolers traveling, but a caring family and community that gets to experience and engage in a new culture together. 
   The PHS Choir performed mostly traditional Portuguese Fado music as well as more classical and Renaissance songs in Latin. Traditional American gospel music was also performed in an effort to showcase a traditional American genre. 
“Fado music…are often songs of longing and lament and are quite moving,” said PHS Choir member Adrian Serieyssol ’23. 
Some PHS Choir members were also excited to sing with two host choirs, one university choir, Universidade of Coimbra, and another high school choir, School Dona Filipa de Lencastre. With over three thousand miles between PHS and the Universidade of Coimbra choir, Choir members like Jamie Reynolds ’24 are delighted to form trans-continental connections with choir students from Portuguese schools.
“It’s  always exciting to meet new people,” said Reynolds. “The [occasion is] extra special because we barely know the host choirs and we’re putting on multiple concerts with them [... and] performing for large crowds with them.” 
   Though they didn’t know the choirs beforehand, students certainly had a whole lot of new friends by the end of the trip.
“They took us to lunch and we got to see where they usually hung out and what they did for fun! I’m still in touch with many of them and we all had so much fun together. The other people in the choirs were also so much fun to talk to and sing with because they were all so insanely talented,” said Raima Srivastava ’25.
Portugal is full of vibrant and diverse culture. The country has a rich cultural heritage, and many PHS Choir students were able to taste the Portuguese cuisine, including traditional dishes like bacalhau, a salt cod dish, and pastéis de nata, the famous Portuguese custard tarts. They sampled the fresh seafood and other regional specialties.
“My favorite place to go was this town called Aveiro and it was the cutest area with little shops and colorful buildings. It was on a river and it was beautiful,” Srivastava said. 
After eight days of exploring and making friends (old and new), the tour is definitely something unforgettable for PHS Choir.
“The trip was an experience I’ll never forget because there were so many things I enjoyed and I became friends with people I never thought I’d talk to,” Srivastava said. 


Kevin Huang ’23 discusses the products of persistence and passion
Sky Jo, STAFF WRITER

How did you start playing the saxophone? 
I started playing the saxophone in third grade when I was choosing my instrument for band. I chose the saxophone because my brother played it and I wanted to play music like him. I fell in love with the instrument really after I first got private lessons and was introduced to saxophonists like Kenny Garrett and Charlie Parker, which really were my first influence.


How did being part of the band change your experience with your instrument?
Being part of the band really propelled me into wanting to become better so I could sound better in the band. But what really propelled my musical journey was doing music programs outside of school, [for example] New Jersey Performing Arts Center Jazz for Teens, [which]  I’ve been part of since I was in eighth grade.


Do you play any other instruments besides the saxophone?
I spend a lot of time between my different instruments, because I play saxophone and piano and I’m spending time on my woodwind doubles, clarinet, and flute, and I’m also learning trumpet.


Do you have any artists you look up to?
Some artists I look up to right now are Sarah Hanahan, Eddie Barbash, Gabriel Kahane, and lots more.


How did you feel when you got a full-ride scholarship to Berklee? How did it happen?
The process of getting the full ride from Berklee is really just getting a good audition. I brought a band that thoroughly rehearsed the tune I was playing for the audition, “Straight Street.” I was prepared for every part of my audition, including the sight reading and ear training portions, because I had practiced them before, so I was able to perform well. I was really happy when I got the notification for the scholarship because Berklee was a school I really loved and wanted to go to.


Do you have any advice for students who want to start playing the saxophone, what advice helped you the most as a student? 
The most important advice I can give is simply to spend time with the instrument, because even if you are a musical prodigy or a genius, you won’t get better at the saxophone unless you’re spending lots of time practicing and playing.


The Impact of Black Stories on Literature


The Hate U Give
Sydney Raivetz, CONTRIBUTING WRITER


         “The Hate U Give” (2018) by Angie Thomas follows a Black teenage girl, Starr Carter, who attends Williamson Prep, a priviledged white high school. However, her home is in Garden Heights, a Black neighborhood. Throughout the book, Starr starts to struggle  to keep her culturally-clashing school life separate from her home life.  
   The differences between the two aspects of Starr’s life is demonstrated by her interactions with people in her daily life. As a Black woman, Starr knows to always tread carefully around police officers and listen to their instructions, since violating these rules may mean death. One night, when Starr and her childhood friend Khalil are driving home together from a party, they’re unexpectedly pulled over by a police officer. Before they know it, Khalil is shot and killed by Officer One-Fifteen. The rest of the story follows Starr as she navigates the loss and outrage of Khalil’s death. 
  While reading this story, I could truly feel the anger that Starr was experiencing at the injustice in the world. She wanted to get justice for Khalil, but that justice could potentially be dangerous to herself and her family. 
  “The Hate U Give” is a must-read story about racism, police brutality, and fighting for what’s right. This novel is about challenging social norms and fighting back against injustice. While this particular story may be fictional, it’s raw and significant to gaining a deeper understanding of what many Black people have to experience every day. This story is more than your average fiction story; for so many people, it’s reality.


A Raisin in the Sun
Heidi Engelbert, CONTRIBUTING WRITER
   Many stories by Black authors are still relevant decades later. “A Raisin in the Sun” (1958) by Lorraine Hansberry was the first play on Broadway to be written by a Black woman. It follows the lives of the Youngers, a Black family facing financial struggles. The story is a great depiction of race relations and class struggle as they try to decide how to use a life insurance check.
   My favorite character is the daughter, Beneatha Younger, because she has a very spirited personality and is not afraid to speak out against her family. Throughout the play, she finds comfort in her boyfriend, Joseph Asagai, who helps her better understand her African heritage and the ways that white culture has infiltrated her life. It feels satisfying to witness Beneatha’s self-confidence grow through her fulfilling relationship with Joseph.
   The most powerful moment in the play comes at the end, when the family refuses to accept a white man’s payment to leave a white neighborhood. It’s a great moment when the whole family denies the man’s offer because they all recognize that, even though the money would help them, the principle of accepting it only because the man didn’t want a Black family in his neighborhood is wrong.
   “A Raisin in the Sun” is a very compelling story that conveys the importance of self-worth and family. In the 1950s, the prospect of putting a play on Broadway with nearly an all-Black cast was considered very risky, and getting investors was difficult. But once the play made it to Broadway, it stayed for over a year, and its words written by Hansberry still speak to many that experience racial discrimination and class struggle today. 


Speak No Evil
Sayanti Datta, CONTRIBUTING WRITER


 “Speak No Evil” (2018) by Uzodinma Iweala is an emotional story about a boy who grows up torn between the two sides of his heritage. The novel is about Gwamniru (“Niru”) Ikemadu, a queer Nigerian boy from a conservative Nigerian household in America. He is the perfect son and student but has to keep his sexuality a secret. One day, his father discovers that Niru is gay and decides to send him to Nigeria so their village can pray for his “recovery.” After attending a spiritual camp, Niru returns with misogynistic and homophobic ideals, which causes him to struggle between the life of two people: the person he used to be and the person he is now.
   From the beginning of the book, we are thrust into Niru’s shoes, which makes it easy to understand what he is thinking. This perspective shows that even families different from a white American family may have internal prejudices that lead to generational hatred. This is an impactful novel that leaves a lasting impression on its readers. 
   Throughout the book, Niru faces many harsh societal pressures on what he should believe in. As a queer person, I deeply relate to trying to find a balance between fitting into what is considered normal and staying true to myself. The book shows what happens when people don’t stay true to themselves, demonstrating how harmful it is when someone is forced to “convert,” and it showed me the similarities between my world and Niru’s. Overall, the novel forces readers to think about their own worldview and recognize the harsh reality all people face when they are forced into boxes by their parents. 


Sylvie’s Love
Avery McDowell, CONTRIBUTING WRITER
“Sylvie’s Love” (2020) is a whimsical yet passionate romantic film, starring Tessa Thompson and Nnamdi Asomugha. Set in the late 1950s and early 1960s, a woman, Sylvie, quickly falls in love with talented saxophonist Robert after meeting him at her father’s record shop, all while she is engaged to her fiancé, Lacy, who lives in Korea. Sylvie is caught between the societal expectation of being a housewife and chasing her dream of a professional life in the television industry. Despite the expectations society places on women, she does not cease to ponder the possibilities of pursuing what ignites her soul. She becomes driven by a piece of advice that Robert tells her: “Life is too short to waste time doing things you don’t love.” Because of this, despite their ever-changing lives and careers, Sylvia and Robert come back to each other in the name of love.
Sylvie’s romantic and personal journey is well-highlighted by the smooth jazzy mood of the film, with the soundtrack consisting of many jazz songs from the 1960s era. The swung and bluesy notes of the jazz also serve as an ode to Robert, a saxophonist rising to fame, and there are many other jazz songs that are featured in the film to orchestrate much of the gatherings in the scenes. The culture in the time period of the late 1950s and early 1960s is also displayed in the fashion, speech, architecture, and soundtrack of the film.
“Sylvie’s Love” provides a meaningful, real, and beautiful story of a romance featuring a primarily Black cast, bringing more diversity into a genre traditionally lacking in representation. More specifically, Black women are included as higher rank figures in the workforce, having impactful influences on their job and creating a powerful voice in their industry. The prominence of Black jazz musicians in the film further contributes to the diversity of the movie.
“Sylvie’s Love” conveys real-life experiences, desires, issues, and successes that may resonate deeply with its audience. The film addresses how one’s dreams, loves, and roles amongst others can impact one’s direction in life. It encourages people to fully value and make time for what makes them truly happy. Overall, “Sylvie’s Love” inspires its audience to disregard what outside forces tell them to do and follow their passions instead.


Black Orpheus
Marina Peres, ARTS AND ENTERTAINMENT CO-EDITOR
William Alena, CONTRIBUTING WRITER


 “Black Orpheus” (1959) is a romantic tragedy set in Brazil in the 1950s, based on a play inspired by the ancient Greek legend of Orpheus, “Orfeu da Conceição,” by Vinicius de Moraes and Antônio Carlos Jobim. The story is about a girl named Eurydice (played by Marpessa Dawn), who has been chased out of the countryside by a stalker and is forced to run away to her cousin, Serafina, who lives in Rio de Janeiro, during the busiest time of year, Carnaval. While in Rio de Janeiro, Eurydice meets a man named Orfeu (played by Breno Mello). Orfeu and Eurydice immediately fall in love, despite his recent engagement to another girl, Mira, and are forced to conceal their relationship.
   Despite the film taking place in a favela, or poverty-stricken neighborhood, the characters are filled with explosive joy, a result of the movie’s romanticization of tragedy. This idea, that on the brink of despair, one can always find jubilance, is best displayed through the character Orfeu, who uses the little money he has to buy something he loves: a guitar. The heartbreaking story uses Brazilian bossa nova, also known as samba-jazz, to enchantingly weave a tale of love and loss. Throughout the film, Orfeu makes the sun rise and children smile by strumming his guitar and singing his new song, “Manhã de Carnaval” (by Jobim and Luiz Bonfá). Even when tragedy strikes upon the two star-struck lovers, his song plays and the lyrics “manhã tão bonita manhã, de um dia feliz que chegou” (“morning so beautiful morning, of a happy day which has arrived”) lets the sun rise once more, an eternal metaphor that in one’s sorrow lies another’s joy.
   Though some may say the film slightly idealizes a life of poverty, beneath it lies the touching message that despite hardship, one can find contentment. The director, Marcel Camus, and his contributors — de Moraes, Jobim, and Bonfá — do a wonderful job at weaving together the animated traditions of Carnaval, the Brazilian Candomblé religion, and one of Ancient Greece’s most depressing tales in a movie that is sure to make you laugh, and maybe even shed a tear.


  



  



SPORTS